# Bazel rules for LaTeX

This repository provides [Bazel](https://bazel.build/) rules for LaTeX,
inspired by [Klaus Aehlig's blog post](http://www.linta.de/~aehlig/techblog/2017-02-19.html)
on the matter.

Instead of depending on the host system's copy of LaTeX, these rules
download [a modular copy of TeXLive from GitHub](https://github.com/ProdriveTechnologies/texlive-modular).
By using fine-grained dependencies, you will only download portions of
TeXLive that are actually used in your documents.

As the output of the LaTeX tools is unnecessarily verbose, these build
rules invoke LaTeX using [latexrun](https://github.com/aclements/latexrun).
Errors and warnings are formatted simlar to those generated by Clang.

BibLaTeX is supported by biber and bibtex. Both are obtained from the
TeX Live distribution. Latexrun defaults to bibtex. Please specify the
command flag mentioned below to build with biber instead.

# Using these rules

Add the following to `WORKSPACE`:

```python
http_archive(
    name = "bazel_latex",
    sha256 = "<checksum>",
    strip_prefix = "bazel-latex-<release>",
    url = "https://github.com/ProdriveTechnologies/bazel-latex/archive/v<release>.tar.gz",
)

load("@bazel_latex//:repositories.bzl", "latex_repositories")

latex_repositories()
```

And add the following `load()` directive to your `BUILD` files:

```python
load("@bazel_latex//:latex.bzl", "latex_document")
```

You can then use `latex_document()` to declare documents that need to be
built. Commonly reused sources (e.g., templates) can be placed in
[`filegroup()`](https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/be/general.html#filegroup)
blocks, so that they don't need to be repeated.

```python
latex_document(
    name = "my_report",
    srcs = glob([
        "chapters/*.tex",
        "figures/*",
        "references.bib",
    ]) + [":company_style"],
    cmd_flags = ["--bibtex-cmd=biber"], % Optional
    main = "my_report.tex",
)

filegroup(
    name = "company_style",
    srcs = glob([
        ...
    ]),
)
```
Utilize `cmd_flags` to provide optional command line arguments, e.g. to run 
biber instead of bibtex.

**Note:** as `lualatex` is effectively invoked as if within the root of the
workspace, all imports of resources (e.g., images) must use the full
path relative to the root.

A PDF can be built by running:

```
bazel build //example:my_report
```

It can be viewed using your system's PDF viewer by running:

```
bazel run //example:my_report_view
```

If you want to get the output from the PDF viewer you can run:

```
bazel run //example:my_report_view_output
```

# Using packages

By default, `latex_document()` only provides a version of TeXLive that
is complete enough to build the most basic documents. Whenever you use
`\usepackage{}` in your documents, you must also add a corresponding
dependency to your `latex_document()`. This will cause Bazel to download
and expose those packages for you. Below is an example of how a document
can be built that depends on the Hyperref package.

```python
latex_document(
    name = "hello",
    srcs = ["@bazel_latex//packages:hyperref"],
    main = "hello.tex",
)
```

This repository provides bindings for most commonly used packages.
Please open a pull request if additional bindings are needed.

# Example

An example is available in the corresponding folder. The example can 
be executed by running:
```
bazel run //example:my_report_view
```

# Platform support

These rules have been tested to work on (using bazel 3.2.0):

- FreeBSD 11.2, building locally.
- macOS Mojave 10.14, building locally.
- macOS Catalina 10.15, building locally.
- Ubuntu 18.04, building locally.
- Ubuntu 18.04 WSL, building locally.
- Ubuntu 18.04, building on a Debian 8 based
  [Buildbarn](https://github.com/buildbarn) setup.
- Ubuntu 19.04 (Disco Dingo), bulding locally.
- Ubuntu 20.04, building locally.
- Manjaro 18.1.2 (Juhraya), building locally.
- Windows 10 1803, building on a Debian 8 based
  [Buildbarn](https://github.com/buildbarn) setup.

These rules are known not to work on:

- Windows 10 1803, building locally.
